---
title: Pencil Programming
---

Back in high school, when I didn't always have a laptop on me but was already
addicted to programming, I used to write code on sheets of binder paper. I did
it sometimes during class when I was bored. I eventually repeated this exercise
during programming classes when taking tests, which were done on paper back
then.

In retrospect, it was a great way to learn to write code. Good code is less
code, and the constraints of handwriting (and later having to reread what you
wrote) encourage you to write less. There's a natural line limit, but also a
width limit! You wouldn't handwrite a 100-column line would you? And you want to
avoid repetition because handwriting is slow and tiring, so you give names to
anything you have to repeat and even come up with shorthand syntax.

You probably also don't handwrite any comments, so to understand it later you
make the code self-explanatory. Anything that you still decide to explain in a
doodled speech bubble is then a good candidate for a comment in real code.

Since you have to read it all later, you try to write down the essence of
your code and omit the boilerplate. You align things visually to make them
easier to parse.

It's an amazing pedagogical tool for teaching good coding practices. I really
hope teachers still use it, at least a little bit. If I were to teach a beginner
programming class right now, I'd have an assignment where students implement
something on paper in class (maybe using the last 15 minutes), and then type it
into an IDE at home. The online portion would be graded based on whether it
works and is well-written, but the paper portion would be graded based on effort
(did the student attempt to write something code-like).
